https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ipJ7df0D_0k
Download and Installation video Script.


This was the script I loosely followed in the video. 
It should serve to help you install, and configure the Mod List.



The follow-along script for installing the 7DtD Smorgasbord Mod List using Wabbajack and Mod Organizer2

Hi, I’m Fin, and this a video about how to install the 7DtD Mod List for Smorgasbord
I’m going to do this whole video in one-long take, with occasional pauses, but no editing.
So let’s begin.

What is Smorgasbord?
Smorgasbord is the Modular Mod List for the game 7 Days to Die, 
It uses the Wabbajack and ModOrganizer 2 Applications.
This Mod List contains over 400+ mods. 
By it being modular, it means you can toggle which mods you want to enable or disable to customize your modded experience with 7DtD.

What is Wabbajack?
Have you ever seen those YouTube gaming videos with Thumbnails, like “Playing Skyrim with 4000 mods!”? That was probably a Wabbajack Mod List video.  
Wabbajack is simply an application that allows you to download Mod Lists and Overhaul mods for popular games like Skyrim and Fallout New Vegas through the NexusMods website.  
Wabbajack is like a matchmaking service hooking you up with your ideal version of a modded PC game. 
The major advantage of using Wabbajack ModLists is that all of the hard work of finding great mods, figuring out Mod Compatibility, determining Load Order, and troubleshooting has already been done for you. You simply get to enjoy the finished product of a deluxe modded experience. 
What is Mod Organizer 2?
ModOrganizer2, also known as MO2, is a Mod Manager application. You plug mods or a full Mod List like Smorgasbord into it, and launch the game from this Program. It is a self-contained system using a virtual mods folder. I know I just lost half of my viewers with IT talk, but I’ll try to break it down for you in simpler terms. You see, normally mods can run out of the base game’s Mods folder, or the AppData Mods folder. 
So, manual modders add their mods to either of those locations.  
What’s special about MO2 is, it creates and runs a virtual Mods folder so it never effects the vanilla game files at all.  A virtual Mods folder only exists when the game is running.  So, if you wanted to hop online and play on a friend’s server, you wouldn’t have to move any mods.  You just launch the game from Steam instead of MO2.  

But wait, isn’t that like Vortex? 
Yes, Vortex exists, but for a variety of reasons, Wabbajack combined with ModOrganizer2 is better for most games. I’m not knocking Vortex, I use it for Stardew Valley, and some Skyrim lists. However, for 7 Days to Die specifically, Vortex is the wrong tool. Trust me, I know, because I first started this project as a Vortex Collection. Avoid Vortex with 7DtD, this is coming from a pro modder who actually likes Vortex, not a hater. 7 Days to Die and Vortex just don’t play nicely for a large, complicated list like this one. 

Requirements for this ModList:
1.	An installed copy of the most recent stable version of 7 Days to Die. 
I’ll show you how to determine a stable version.
Steam, Right-Click 7DtD, Properties, Betas, most recent Stable version.
At the time of this recording, it’s 2.2, if you are watching this in the future, it will be what ever is the latest stable version. 
Note: Smorgasbord will never move to an experimental build. And, it can take me a few days (sometimes weeks) to update the list to the current stable version, so be patient, I’m one man doing this for free in my spare time. 
So, what else do you need?
2.	Hardware capable of running the base game. Look at the Hardware requirements for the game on Steam if you are unsure.
Some of the fancier mods might require stronger/newer hardware.  
If you have not upgraded your PC in like 12 years, don’t blame me.  
Some of the mods on this list like The Descent require at least 16GB of RAM. 
Some mods like Better Biomes are very resource intensive. Either lower your graphic settings, get better hardware, or live without that mod.  It’s a gorgeous mod, but it takes like 20-30 FPS off of your game.  
If your computer can’t run those mods, just disable them. It’s not the end of the world. You’ll still have fun with the list, I promise.
3.	Windows 10 1809+ or Windows 11 are now required for MO2. 

4.	You will also need this Microsoft Visual C++  file if you don’t already have it, link in description.

 Python 3.11. Microsoft Visual C++ Redistributable 14.40.33810.0 is required, install from https://aka.ms/vs/17/release/vc_redist.x64.exe if needed.

So how do I download and install Smorgasbord?
There is a Git Hub ReadMe with all of the directions, FAQs, troubleshooting, configuration steps, and commentary to help you with this process.  However, after several requests, I’m going to show you the process now on video.
There will be a link in the description for the GitHub ReadMe. 
Step 0. Make a NexusMods account.  
This is a non-negotiable. 
Either a Free or Premium account will work.
If you have a Free account, prepare to do a lot of clicking.
For Free accounts, Wabbajack will open one-browser-tab-at-a-time, for you to manually download each mod.
So with 500+ mods, you can expect to click through 500+ tabs one-at-a-time.
So that is why if you have more money than time, it’s worth paying for the premium account. 
Premium accounts will click once to download all of the Nexus mods, and download them at a higher speed.
If you don't already have an account, you can register at NexusMods. Link in description.
here: https://users.nexusmods.com/register

Step 1: Download 7DtD. 
Go into Steam, download the latest stable version of 7DtD compatible with the Mod List. 


Step 2: Make sure you have a clean installation!
Be certain you have not made any changes to the base game files. 
If you have molested your base game files in any way, you should delete and reinstall the game now. 
If in doubt, delete and reinstall. 

Step 3: Delete everything out of the base game’s Mods folder, except for 0_TFP_Harmony.  
Go to: 
C:\Program Files (x86)\Steam\steamapps\common\7 Days To Die\Mods
You can get there, by Right-Clicking 7DtD in Steam, Manage, Browse Local Files, Mods folder.
Do not delete Harmony! 
This is a base game file required to play with mods. 
Leave it alone! 
Your base game’s Mods folder should look like the one displayed on the screen right now!  
If it doesn’t look like this, you are wrong, but I can help correct you. 
If you are missing Harmony from your Mods folder, go into:
Steam, Right-Click 7DtD, Properties, Installed Files, Run a File Integrity check.  It will download the missing Harmony file.

Step 4: Delete everything in the AppData Mods folder. 
Go to: C:\Users\YourUserName\AppData\Roaming\7DaysToDie
If you don’t have a Mods folder here, that’s okay.
If you do have a Mods folder, click into it, and delete everything inside of this Mods folder.
We do this so the game doesn’t load mods from multiple locations, double-loading mods, messing up load order, or causing other issues.  
The only place we want to run mods from, is virtually, from inside of MO2. 

Step 5. Download the latest version of Wabbajack.
Go to: https://www.wabbajack.org/
Link in description. 
Download and install the Wabbajack application. 
If you have ever used a Windows Installer Wizard, it’s just running the executable, and clicking next until you’ve installed it. 
Note: If you have an older version of Wabbajack already on your system, delete it, and download the latest version of Wabbajack.  Why? Because 7DtD was only recently added as a game available to Wabbjajack because your boy Fin and the Wabbajack dev team integrated it into their system.  

Step 6: Run the Wabbajack application and find the Smorgasbord Mod List for 7DtD. 
Open the Wabbajack application.
Before going any further, connect your Login from NexusMods to Wabbajack in the Wabbajack application. 
From the Wabbajack application main screen, press the settings "gearwheel" icon. 
Login to your NexusMods account from inside of the Wabbajack application, and enter your credentials.
If you successfully entered your login username, password, captcha, and (optional) MFA token; it will look like this.
Do not proceed any further in the Wabbajack Application. We’ll come back to it in a moment.

Step 7: Create a ModLists Folder
You can use either the C-Drive, D-Drive, or wherever else you like. I tend to run my ModLists out of the same drive I am running that game from. For this video and directions, I am using the C-Drive.
Create a new folder at the top layer of the C-Drive named “ModLists”. 
By top layer of the C-Drive, I mean, this new ModLists folder is not nested in any other folder. It’s nested directly at the top layer of the C-Drive.
You don’t have to name it the ModLists folder, you could name it something else, I don’t care, just don’t name it “downloads” because it will 100% screw up your installation. If you just keep the naming convention I used, it would be best for everyone should you need help troubleshooting. Also, if you like this Wabbajack modList, you can download others to this same directory.  Make sense?  Good!

Step 8: Download and Install Smorgasbord.
Return to the Wabbajack Application,
Hit the Browse Lists button.
Hit the check box for Non-featured Mod Lists
Use the All games dropdown arrow, and select 7DtD. 
Smorgasbord is the first and currently only Wabbajack Mod List for 7DtD. 
Click the Smorgasbord Picture.
Now click the Download and Install button.
When you click that button, it will take a few moments to process the request.
You will be prompted for where you want to add an installation location and download location. 
Select the ModLists folder you just made.
Any other Wabbajack mod List you choose to download should also go here next to Smorgasbord.
You will have a Smorgasbord folder for the installation under your ModList folder, and a downloads folder nested within that Smorgasbord folder. 
This downloads folder is where lal of the zipped mods get downloaded to from NexusMods.
After you have selected both drive locations in the Wabbajack Application, hit the install button.
If you are on a Nexus premium account, it’s one touch, and it can run in the background while you do other things. This process is as fast as your internet speed.  Takes me an hour on premium with slow rural internet speeds. Takes my friends with premium on fast speeds minutes. 
If you are on a free account at Nexus, you will be spending the next several hours clicking to download everything manually. 1/10 experience, I wouldn’t recommend it. 
If anything gets stuck or fails during download, sometimes just wait 15 minutes and try downloading again.
Note: If and when you want to update the list, you just go to download and install it again. It will only download what is new or changed from the previous installation. It will overwrite your current installation.   
Alright, so we are going to fast-forward and pretend you just completed the download and installation process.

Step 8: Open the MO2 instance from the Smorgasbord folder. 
C:\ModLists\Smrgasbord
Hit the ModOrganizer.exe file.  
This launches the MO2 instance for the Smorgasbord Mod List.
This is how you actually run this mod list.
You hit play to launch it from inside MO2.

Step 9:
Disable EAC. Easy-Anti-Cheat. 

Step 10: Configure MO2 Smorgasbord Mods prior to launching the game.
The first thing I recommend, is to skim through the mod List in MO2.  Yes, I know there are 500+ mods, I’m not asking you to read everything just the separators and polarizing mods.
I say this because many of the mods on this list are subject to personal taste.  
I love metal, and hate hip hop. I don’t like country, but love me some Johnny Cash. 
That’s how you are going to feel about what I call polarizing mods on this list.
The major polarizing mods are: CompoPack, NPCs, WalkerSim and Blood Moon Chaos. 
Mods to disable if you have a weak/old system: Descent. Cannot run Better Biomes.  
After you have read and toggled your polarizing/hardware specific mods, I strongly encourage you to play a test game for an hour or two when you first launch the Smorgasbord list. 
In MO2, I generally say, don’t enable anymore of the OP mods than I already selected for you for your first real playthrough of this pack. Why, because I am a good judge of balance, and you should trust the chef. I kind of know what I am doing in the kitchen.
I strongly discourage people using Smorgasbord for Power Fantasy Munchkin playthroughs, but at the end of the day, it’s your game, so play however you like. 
I will now go off script to describe the Separators, some big mods, and overall feel of the MO2 application.
Best Practice: The things you should and shouldn’t do here
Don’t toggle mods midsave. Toggle mods, then start a new game.

Step 11: How to add your own mods to MO2.
First, inside of MO2, go to Settings, Nexus tab, and connect your MO2 instance to Nexus Mods. 
Then hit the ‘Associate with “Download with manager” links’ button. Exit settings.
Go to the NexusMods 7dtd mod web page for mods you want to add.
Download the mod with the “Vortex” Nexus Mods Manager download button.
It will directly download the mod into your MO2 7DtD Smorgasbord downloads folder.
In MO2, drag it from the downloads right side of MO2, into the Mod name section of Smorgasbord.
Enable it, make notes, whatever you want.
If you want to keep this mod but still update Smorgasbord, make sure you use Open-Square-Bracke, No Delete, Close-Square-Bracket
Looks like this: [No Delete]Name_of_the_mod_you_added

How to perform Advanced Random World Generation?
We will refer to this as RWG. 
If you see RWG on Discord, forums, plebbit, etc, this is what we are talking about right here.
If you want to see all of the community made POIs, I’d recommend an 8 or 10k map. Making a map larger than that is unnecessary, a time commitment, and you will not likely explore the whole thing in a playthrough. I know some people like to show off 16k maps, but unless you are on a big server, or planning a super long playthrough, it’s just overkill. 
If you are running potato grade hardware, do not make maps larger than 10k.
If you make maps smaller than 6k, you might have difficulty finding traders.
If you enabled The Descent and or CompoPack, it will add a ton of time to the RWG process. Longer if you are playing with Many Cities, and Many Wilderness POIs.  Longer if you have older and weaker hardware.  Again, if you are on a potato, make smaller simpler maps.  I used to recommend Many and Many, but now I prefer Default City, Default Wilderness, No Rivers, No Cracks, No Crevices. Few Lakes. I like lakes, because at least there’s variety. Rivers use one stamp, it’s boring. Cracks and crevices are just annoying to fall into when driving.  I like flatter worlds with some hills and few mountains just for variety.

Recommended in-game Settings:

Graphics, Brightness to 0%! Try it with the default lighting mod I selected for you, it’s excellent. 
If you’ve been playing this game for a few hundred hours or more, you should play at least one level of difficulty higher than you normally do.
So if you normally play Default Adventurer, play Nomad, or higher. I like that level personally to start the game. You can always increase difficulty and zombie speed later on. 
I personally recommend setting Loot Abundance to 75% or lower, and Experience gain to 75% precisely. I think both of those are the right level to give you a challenging, but enjoyable playthrough.

...
